# 来源: https://www.dhi.ac.uk/strype/TransformServlet?page=book1_078

| home| | transcriptions| | parishes| | illustrations| | search| | help| | about |   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  | Table of Contents|  Book 1 |  Chapter 16 |  page navigation |  print   
---|---|---|---|---  
Or jump to: Please select a location:PREFACEChapter 1: Title pageChapter 2: [Letter to the] LORD MAIOR: [...]Chapter 3: The prefaceChapter 4: STOW'S Epistle DedicatoryChapter 5: THE LIFE OF JOHN STOWChapter 6: A Catalogue of Authors, Records and ManuscriptsChapter 7: CHAPTERS and CONTENTSChapter 8: A LIST of the Subscribers Names.\--------------------BOOK 1Chapter 1: The Division of the CITY into four Parts.Chapter 2: The Antiquity of the Wall built about the City.Chapter 3: Of the Old Town-Ditch without the Wall of the City.Chapter 4: The Gates made through the Walls of the City.Chapter 5: Of the Ancient and present Rivers, Brooks...Chapter 6: Of the Ancient and Famous River of THAMESChapter 7: A Survey of the River of Thames...Chapter 8: A further Testimony concerning the River of Thames...Chapter 9: A more particular Account of the Locks, the Wears, and Mills on the Thames .Chapter 10: A further Account of this famous River of ThamesChapter 11: Two Acts ... for the Preservation of this RiverChapter 12: The River LEE or LEYChapter 13: London Bridge. The Antiquity of it .Chapter 14: Of such antient Towers and Castles.Chapter 15: Of the TOWER of LondonChapter 16: The Antiquity and first Foundation of the Tower.Chapter 17: The various Accidents, Occurrences ... that have happened in or concerning the Tower.Chapter 18: Of the MINT in the Tower .Chapter 19: Of the Office of the Ordnance kept within the Tower .Chapter 20: Of the Offices of keeping the RECORDS in the Tower;Chapter 21: Of the Houses for Students in the Law, called, The Inns of Court and Chancery.Chapter 22: Of Schools, and other Houses of Learning, as are, or have been in the City.Chapter 23: The College of Physicians.Chapter 24: SION College.Chapter 25: The Publick SCHOOLS.Chapter 26: Colleges and Hospitals.Chapter 27: St. Katharines.Chapter 28: An Account of the dreadful Fire of London, Ann. 1666.Chapter 29: Ancient Customs for Trade and Merchandise.Chapter 30: A Rehearsal of many Honourable Acts of the City and Citizens.Chapter 31: The Worth of Citizens. Supply their Princes Occasions for present Money.\--------------------BOOK 2Chapter 1: The Division of the CITY into four Parts: And into Twenty Six Wards,Chapter 2: PORTSOKEN WARD;Chapter 3: TOWER STREET WARD.Chapter 4: EALDGATE WARD.Chapter 5: LIMESTREET WARD.Chapter 6: BISHOPSGATE WARD.Chapter 7: BROADSTREET WARD.Chapter 8: CORNHIL WARD.Chapter 9: LANGBORNE WARD.Chapter 10: BILLINGSGATE WARD.Chapter 11: BRIDGE WARDChapter 12: CANDLEWICKE STREET WARD.Chapter 13: WALBROOK WARD.Chapter 14: DOWNEGATE WARD.\--------------------BOOK 3Chapter 1: WARDS on the West Side of WALBROOKE.Chapter 2: CORDWAINERS STREET WARD.Chapter 3: CHEAPE WARD.Chapter 4: COLEMAN STREET WARD.Chapter 5: BASSINGS HALL WARD.Chapter 6: CRIPPLEGATE WARD.Chapter 7: ALDERSGATE WARD.Chapter 8: FARINGDON WARD INFRA, or WITHIN.Chapter 9: BRREADSTREET WARD.Chapter 10: QUEEN HITH WARD.Chapter 11: CASTLE BAYNARD WARD.Chapter 12: The WARD of FARINGDON EXTRA, or WITHOUT.\--------------------BOOK 4Chapter 1: BRIDGE WARD WITHOUT.Chapter 2: The SUBURBS without the Walls, brieflyChapter 3: Suburb without Aldersgate...Chapter 4: The Parish of St. Giles in the Fields.Chapter 5: Stepney, and Hackney, Suburbs North East in the County of Middlesex.Chapter 6: ...the Manour of Finsbury, in the County of Middlesex.Chapter 7: LIBERTIES of the Dutchy of Lancaster.\--------------------BOOK 5Chapter 1: The State of the Parish Priests and Parishioners of London anciently.Chapter 2: nullChapter 3: The Endeavours used in the City for the restraining of Vice...Chapter 4: ...the Gifts and Charities committed to the Trust of the Twelve Companies...Chapter 5: Of the Temporal Government of this City.Chapter 6: The Ancient Government of the City.Chapter 7: Government by MAIORS; How ancient:Chapter 8: The ALDERMEN of LondonChapter 9: Freemen of the City, called BARONS.Chapter 10: The MERCHANT-TAYLORS Company.Chapter 11: The other Companies following the Twelve.Chapter 12: BARBER-CHIRURGEONS: Formerly two distinct Companies.Chapter 13: INHOLDERS...Chapter 14: STATIONERS. The ancientest Printers.Chapter 15: GLOVERS...Chapter 16: Many Lands and Tenements of the CompaniesChapter 17: TradeChapter 18: Tonnage and PoundageChapter 19: Remarks concerning the Merchants of London.Chapter 21: Some further Account of the Strangers that settled in London.Chapter 22: Laws, Customs and Usages, ancient and modern.Chapter 23: Laws and Customs of the Wardmote Inquest.Chapter 24: The Laws and Ordinances for Orphans and Children of Freemen.Chapter 25: Antient Assize and Weight of BreadChapter 26: The Royal Charters of the City...Chapter 27: The Citizens upon all Occasions insist upon their Charters.Chapter 28: The Courts of London.Chapter 29: Laws and Customs of the City.Chapter 30: Divers of the most important Acts of Common Council.Chapter 31: A Collection of divers Orders and Appointments made for the City.Chapter 32: The Military Government of the City of London.\--------------------BOOK 6Chapter 1: The Description of WESTMINSTER, proceeding from Temple-Bar.Chapter 2: The EPITAPHS and INSCRIPTIONS upon the Persons interred in St. PETERs.Chapter 3: St. Margaret's Church.Chapter 4: The Government of this City.Chapter 5: The present State of this City.Chapter 6: The Boundaries, Streets, Lanes, Passages, and new Buildings, of St. James's...\--------------------APPENDIX 1Chapter 1: A Discourse commendatory of the City of LondonChapter 2: The ancient Tract of Fitz-StephenChapter 3: A Writing of a Learned Lawyer and Antiquarian...Chapter 4: Of the CHARITIES and Charitable Foundations belonging to the City.Chapter 5: Of divers Roman and other Antique Curiosities found in LONDONChapter 6: LUDGATE, What it is; not what it was.Chapter 7: The Order of the Hospitals of King Henry.Chapter 8: An Act of Common Council:Chapter 9: Chapter 10: A brief DISCOURSEChapter 11: A VISITATIONChapter 12: The Circuit-Walk on the South East and East Parts.Chapter 13: The Circuit Walk on the East and North East Parts bordering upon LONDONChapter 14: The Circuit Walk on the North and North West Parts bordering upon LONDONChapter 16: \--------------------APPENDIX 2Chapter 1:   
  


* * *

_TOWER of London. Building thereof._|  78  
---|---  
  
* * *

TOWER of London. Building thereof. 

was the original Author and Founder as well thereof, as also of many other Towers, Castles and great Buildings within this Realm. But (as I have already before noted) Cæsar remained not here so long; nor had he in his Head any such Matter, but only to dispatch a Conquest of this barbarous Country, and to proceed to greater Matters. Neither do the Roman Writers make mention of any such Buildings Erected by him here.  |  In my Annals.  
---|---  
__ And therefore leaving this, and proceeding to more grounded Authority, I find in a fair Register Book of the Acts of the Bishops of Rochester, set down by Edmond of Hadenham, that William the First (surnamed Conqueror) Builded the Tower of London; to wit, the great White and Square Tower there, about the Year of Christ 1078, appointing Gundulph, then Bishop of Rochester, to be principal Surveyor and Overseer of that Work; who was for that Time lodged in the House of Edmere a Burgess of London. The very Words of which mine Author are these; Gundulphus Episcopus mandato Willielmi Regis magni præfuit Operi magnæ Turris London. Quo Tempore hospitatus est apud quendam Edmerum Burgensem London. Qui dedit unum Were Ecclesiæ Roffen.  |  William the Conqueror built the White Tower, Anno 1078.  
---|---  
__ Ye have heard before, that the Wall of this City was all round about furnished with Towers and Bulwarks, in due Distance every one from other; and also that the River of Thames, with his Ebbing and Flowing, on the South side had subverted the said Wall and Towers there. Wherefore, it is supposed, King William, for defence of this City, in Place most dangerous and open to the Enemy, having taken down the second Bulwark in the East Part of the Wall from the Thames, Builded this Tower, which was the great square Tower (now called the White Tower) and hath been since at divers Times enlarged with other Buildings adjoining, as shall be shewed hereafter.  |   
---|---  
__ This Tower was by Tempest of Wind sore shaken in the Year 1090, the Fourth of William Rufus [when the Chronicles speak of the Roof of Bow Church taken off, and 600 Houses in London overthrown.] But it was again by the said Rufus and Henry I. repaired. They also caused a Castle to be builded under the said Tower, to wit, on the Southside toward the Thames. And also incastellated the same round about.  |  Damaged by the Tempest, and Repaired. Will. Malmsb. Matt. Paris. J. London.  
---|---  
And the bearing of this expensive Building put the said K. William upon Exactions, as one of our Historians writes] William Rufus challenged the Investiture of Prelates: he pilled and shaved the People with Tribute, especially to spend about the Tower of London, and the great Hall at Westminster.  |  K. Will. Rufus, Polls the People for his Buildings about the Tower. Hen. Huntingt. Libr. 6.  
---|---  
[Othowerus, Acolinillus, Otto, and Geffrey, Magnaville Earl of Essex, were Four the first Constables of this Tower of London by Succession. All which held by Force a Portion of Land, that pertained to the Priory of the Holy Trinity within Aldgate, that is to say, East Smithfield, near unto the Tower, making thereof a Vineyard; and would not depart from it till the Second Year of K. Stephen, when the same was adjudged and restored to the said Church.  |  The first Constables of the Tower. They held Eastsmithfield, and made a Vineyard.  
---|---  
This said Geffrey, surnamed Magnaville, was Earl of Essex, Constable of the Tower, Sheriff of London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hertford Shires, as appeareth by a Charter of Maud the Empress, Dated 1141. He also fortified the Tower of London against K. Stephen. But the King took him in his Court at S. Albans, and would not deliver him, till he had rendred the Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden and Pleshey in Essex.  |  Geffrey Magnaville, Constable of the Tower. Ex Chart.  
---|---  
In the Year 1153, the Tower of London, and the Castle of Windsor were by the King delivered to Richard de Lucie, to be safely kept.  |  The Tower intrusted to Richard de Lucie, Custos of the Tower.  
---|---  
In the Year 1155, Thomas Becket being Chancellor to Henry II. caused the Flemmings to be banished out of England; their Castles lately Builded to be pulled down, and the Tower of London to be Repaired.  |  Tho. Becket repairs the Tower. Roger WIndover.  
---|---  
About the Year 1190. the Second of Richard the First, William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of England, for cause of Dissension between him and Earl John the King's Brother, that was Rebel, enclosed the Tower and Castle of London with an outward Wall of Stone embattelled; and also caused a deep Ditch to be cast about the same, thinking (as I have said before) to have environed it with the River of Thames. By the making of this Ditch in East Smithfield, the Church of the Holy Trinity in London lost half a Mark Rent by the Year, and the Mill was removed, that belonged to the poor Brethren of the Hospital of St. Katharine, and to the Church of the Trinity aforesaid; which was no small Loss and Discommodity to either Part. And the Garden which the King had hired of the Brethren for six Marks the Year, for the most part was wasted and marred by the Ditch. Recompence was often promised but never performed, till King Edward coming after, gave to the Brethren five Marks and an Half for that Part which the Ditch had devoured; and the other Part thereof without he yielded them again, which they hold; and of the said Rent of five Marks and an half they have a Deed, by virtue whereof they are well paid to this Day.  |  Longchamp, L. Chancellor, encompasseth the Tower with a Wall and Ditch. John Bever. St. Katharine's Mill stood where now is the Iron Gate of the Tower.  
---|---  
It is also to be noted, and cannot be denied, but that the said Inclosure and Ditch, took the like or greater Quantity of Ground from the City within the Wall; namely, on that Part called the Tower Hill, besides breaking down of the City Wall, from the White Tower to the first Gate of the City, called the Postern. Yet have I not read of any Quarrel made by the Citizens, or Recompence demanded by them for that Matter; because all was done for good of the Cities Defence thereby, and to their good Likings.  |  Encroachments made by the Ditch upon the City.  
---|---  
But Matthew Paris writeth, that in the Year 1239, "King Henry the Third Fortified the Tower of London to another End; wherefore the Citizens fearing lest that was done to their Detriment, complained: and the King answered; That he had not done it to their Hurt; but (saith he) I will from henceforth do as my Brother doth, in building and fortifying Castles, who beareth the Name to be wiser than I am."  |  Mat. Paris. Bulwarks of the Tower builded by K. Henry III.  
---|---  
" It followed in the next Year, (saith mine Author) the said Noble Buildings of the Stone Gate and Bulwark, which the King had caused to be made by the Tower of London, on the Westside thereof, was shaken as it had been with an Earthquake, and fell down, which the King again commanded to be built in better sort than before, which was done."  |  West Gate and Bulwarks of the Tower fell down.  
---|---  
" And yet again in the Year 1241, the said Wall and Bulwarks that were newly Builded, wherein the King had bestowed more than twelve Thousand Marks, were unrecoverably quite thrown down, as afore; for the which Chance the Citizens of London were nothing sorry; for they were threatned, that the said Wall and Bulwarks were builded, to the End, that if any of them would contend for the Liberties of the City, they might be imprisoned: And that many might be laid in divers Prisons, many Lodgings were made that no one should speak with another."  |  Wall and Bulwarks again fall down, and new Builded.  
---|---  
Thus much Matthew Paris avoucheth for this Building.  |   
---|---  
To |   
---|---  
top|  previous page |  next page   
---|---|---  
  
* * *

© hriOnline, 2007  
The Stuart London Project, Humanities Research Institute, The University of Sheffield,  
34 Gell Street, Sheffield, S3 7QY, Tel: 0114 222 9890   
---  
| 
